# INFO536_Final_Project
Author: Kendra Lyons

## Data, wrangling script and R markdown for final report on voting and income for Data Science and Public Interests. 

Data from two sources, the U.S. Census Bureau and FiveThirtyEight, were central to this project. Table 7, entitled “Reported Voting and Registration of Family Members, by Age and Family Income”, and Table 10, entitled “Reasons For Not Voting, By Selected Characteristics” from the U.S. Census Bureau’s 2020 Current Population Survey were both used, and can be freely accessed on their website at: https://www.census.gov/data/tables/time-series/demo/voting-and-registration/p20-585.html. From Table 7, only the data on all adults (rows 8-18) was selected, since, at this time, how age influences voting and registration is not being studied. Rather, this project is primarily focused on how household income affects voting and registration. For the same reason, only the data from Table 10 that is broken down by income (rows 36-47) was selected for analysis. Census data was aggregated by income bracket and both raw numbers (in thousands) and percentages were included. Respondents were asked whether they were registered to vote, whether they voted, and if they reported not voting, what the reason was.

Data from a FiveThirtyEight & Ipsos poll conducted in September 2020 was obtained from their GitHub repository “non-voters”, located at: https://github.com/fivethirtyeight/data/tree/master/non-voters. These data were collected and used for a story published on October 26, 2020 entitled “Why Many Americans Don’t Vote”. Specifically, questions analyzed asked people whether “traditional parties and politicians” cared about people like them, how easy they considered voting in national elections to be, the importance of the results of the 2020 presidential election, how frequently they vote and more. Data were also collected on income, education, voting frequency and more. According to the readme attached to the Git repository, these data came from “5,239 respondents who matched to the voter file and whose verified vote history we have, and 597 respondents who did not match to the voter file and described themselves as voting”rarely” or “never,” all of whom have been eligible for at least 4 elections”

This researcher’s goals in selecting this data were to explore and highlight the relationships between income and election participation, but education is also taken into account in the statistical analysis. Income and Education can be seen as two aspects of class, both of which can influence a citizen’s decision to vote. This is important from a policy standpoint because understanding why voters do and don’t vote and what socioeconomic factors may influence their decisions can help activists, canvassers, advocacy organizations, political parties and governments increase voter turnout. Identifying demographics with lower levels of voting can also encourage policymakers to craft policy that benefits such populations, which is likely to encourage their democratic participation and personal investment in our political system.

For more information about the data, please refer to the following:

* https://github.com/fivethirtyeight/data/tree/master/non-voters#readme
* https://www.census.gov/topics/public-sector/voting/about.html
* https://github.com/fivethirtyeight/data/blob/master/non-voters/nonvoters_codebook.pdf